[BLOG] Add libsf_error_state: SciPy's first shared library (#892)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/libsf-error-state.md

[`scipy.special`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/special.html).

Python has become wildly popular as a scripting language for scientific and other data intensive applications. It owes
much of its success to an exemplary execution of the "compiled core, interpreted shell" principle. One can orchestrate
simulation pipelines, preprocess and munge data, set up and use explanatory or predictive statistical models, make plots
and tables, and more, in an expressive high level language—while delegating computationally intensive tasks to compiled
libraries.

The default CPython interpreter was designed specifically to make it easy to extend Python programs with efficient
native code. The Python C API is well thought out and straightforward to work with. The controversial global interpreter
lock or GIL, a barrier to free threading within Python, has the benefit of making it much easier to call out to native
code, since one need not worry about the thread-safety of wrapped compiled libraries.

By wrapping, filling in gaps, and providing user friendly Python APIs to a wide range of battle tested, permissively

> licensed and public domain scientific software tools—SciPy's founding developers [] were able to kickstart the growth of

Author: Thanks Ralf, those were the places where I meant to go back and add footnotes. There added now

module in SciPy. Extension modules from separate projects are like separate worlds, and cannot communicate with one
another except through their Python interfaces []. SciPy instead has its own context manager:
[`scipy.special.errstate`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.special.errstate.html) that
mirrors `np.errstate`.

```
In  [1]: import numpy as np

In  [2]: import scipy.special as special

In  [3]: x = np.linspace(-4, 4, 5)

In  [4]: with special.errstate(all="raise"):
    ...:     _ = special.gamma(x)
	...:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SpecialFunctionError                      Traceback (most recent call last)
Cell In[4], line 2
      1 with special.errstate(all="raise"):
----> 2     _ = special.gamma(x)

SpecialFunctionError: scipy.special/Gamma: singularity
```

## Some exciting developments

To create a ufunc for a mathematical function, one needs a scalar implementation of this function, known as a scalar
kernel, that's written in a compiled language. Until recently, `scipy.special` had scalar kernels written in all of C,

> C++, Fortran 77, and Cython. In August of 2023, Irwin Zaid (izaid) at Oxford proposed rewriting all of the scalar

Author: good idea

kernels in C++ header files in such a way that they could be included in both C++ and CUDA programs. This would allow
these scalar kernels to also be used in GPU-aware array libraries like CuPy and PyTorch, improving special function
support across array library backends. I've been supported by the 2020 NASA ROSES grant, _Reinforcing the Foundations of
Scientific Python_ (with travel and compute costs partially covered by the 2023 NumFocus SDG _Streamlined Special
Function Development in SciPy_), to work together with Irwin to put this plan into action. With additional help from

> SciPy maintainer Ilhan Polat (ilayn), who made a heroic effort to translate over twenty thousand lines of Fortran scalar

Reviewer: same comment as above: make "ilayn" a link to GitHub handle?

found that, for some reason, there was a separate extension module just for the function
[`ellip_harm_2`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.special.ellip_harm_2.html#scipy.special.ellip_harm_2).
As expected, `special.errstate` did not and had never worked for `ellip_harm_2` either, but since there were no relevant
tests, no one knew.

We saw three options:

1. Have the Python interface for modifying the error handling state (`special.errstate` and
   [`special.seterr`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.special.seterr.html)) update the state
   in each extension module, taking care that the state remains synchronized.

2. Extract the error handling state and primitives for managing it into a shared library that would be linked with
   each extension module.

3. Keep the error handling state in one of the extension modules and have it retrieved from there by the others.

We chose to create a shared library because it seemed like the more principled option []. As the saying goes: we do
things not because they are easy, but because we think they will be easy []. Quansight Labs Co-director Ralf Gommers

> (rgommers) knew from long experience that this may be difficult to get right, but trusted that we'd be able to figure

Reviewer: several more empty brackets in this paragraph. also make "rgommers" a GitHub handle link?

memory.

Note that the title of this article isn't entirely accurate. A Python extension module is itself a shared library which
is loaded by the Python interpreter at runtime. Thus SciPy actually ships many shared libaries and has done so from its
earliest days. What we mean is the first regular shared library that's not a Python extension module. Also, although
we've been talking in terms of linking programs with a shared library, in this case we are linking Python extension
modules with a shared library. It's perfectly valid to link one shared library with one or more others.

## The relevant code

Having decided on the shared library approach, we looked into code `scipy.special` used for managing error handling state.
In essence, things were very simple. Let's walk through the core lines.

There is an enumeration type `sf_action_t` giving human readable names to the different error handling policies:

```c
enum sf_action_t {
	SF_ERROR_IGNORE = 0;
	SF_ERROR_WARN;
	SF_ERROR_RAISE;
}
```

And then an array `sf_error_actions` storing the error handling policy associated to each special function error

> handling type. We see that the default is to ignore errors all errors, matching what we observed in the example with

Reviewer: typo: "errors all errors"

}

sf_action_t scipy_sf_error_get_action(sf_error_t code)
{
    return sf_error_actions[(int)code];
}
```

If a user runs the following in an IPython session

```python
In  [1]: import scipy.special as special

In  [2]: special.seterr(loss="warn")
```

then somewhere down in the stack, the following call will occur to update the error state.

```c
scipy_sf_error_set_action(SF_ERROR_LOSS, SF_ERROR_WARN)
```

If `special.gamma` is evaluated at an array containing a negative integer, then when the scalar kernel is evaluating the
offending entry, it will signal `SF_ERROR_SINGULAR` and `sf_error_actions` will be consulted to figure out what action
to take.

## The many battles to actually ship it

The shared library `libsf_error_state`'s contents are fairly simple, but how does one actually ship a shared library
within a Python package like SciPy? The process for creating and using shared libraries depends on the operating system
and compiler toolchain. SciPy supports a wide range of platforms in aim of its goal to democratize access to scientific
computing tools and the greatest challenge turned out to be getting things to work on each of them. Several times, just

> as we thought everything was finally working, another quirk would pop up that needed to be addressed.

Reviewer: It may be worth pointing out that it's extremely rare for Python packages to contain an intenral shared library - we didn't know of other examples of this being done when we started working on this topic.

### Path troubles

> The initial challenge was finding the right invocations to give to the meson build system used by SciPy []. Extension

Reviewer: empty brackets here

modules are configured in the `meson.build` files spread across SciPy's source tree and we needed to figure out how to
set up a shared library and link it into each of the special function ufunc extension modules. Irwin and I begin working
on this independently, comparing notes as we went.

The first hiccup is that the following invocations were working on Irwin's Mac.

Setting up the shared library like this.

> ```meson

Reviewer: Seems like we're missing pygments support for Meson here. A little unfortunate, it works on GitHub I believe. May want to change to marking this as python code if it can't work as meson syntax.

documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/building/index.html#building-from-source-for-scipy-development), I was
using the `"python dev.py build"` workflow and he was using an editable install: `"pip install -e . --no-build-isolation"`.
For the editable install, SciPy is installed directly in its own project folder, and the shared library and the relevant
extension modules were all being installed next to each other in `~/scipy/scipy/special`. For the `dev.py` workflow,
SciPy is installed elsewhere. Since I didn't specify where to install the shared library, it got put in the wrong
place. It turned out what I had to do was configure the `install_dir` in `meson` like this:

```
sf_error_state_lib = shared_library('sf_error_state', # Name of the library
  # Implementation files contained it.
  ['sf_error_state.c'],
  # Additional places the preprocessor can look for header files
  include_directories: ['../_lib', '../_build_utils/src'],
  install: true
  # Tell meson where to install the shared library
  install_dir: py3.get_install_dir() / 'scipy/special',
)
```

But even after this, I was still receiving the same error. After consulting `meson`'s excellent documentation and

> looking at some related issues, it turns out that the `pip` takes care to set the

Reviewer: typo: "the" not needed in "the pip".

`RPATH` [] for each extension module, which tells the dynamic linker where to look
for shared libraries.

To get things to work with `dev.py`, I needed to explicitly set the `RPATH` in `meson` by adding
`install_rpath: '$ORIGIN'` to each extension module. `'$ORIGIN'` means to search in the same folder as the extension
module.

### Building Wheels on Windows

After setting `install_dir` and `install_rpath` correctly, all but one of SciPy's CI jobs were passing. The sole failing
job involved building a wheel on Windows. A

> wheel can be thought of as a

Reviewer: nit: could reflow lines here

Author: I had my editor set to wrap everything at 120 lines. I can change it to a more conventional 80 after everything settles, to avoid messing up the diff before then.

precompiled binary for a Python package. The underlying issue was that Windows does not have support for something like

> `RPATH`, following a less configurable set of rules for determining the search path for shared libraries [].

Reviewer: more empty brackets here and in the next sentences.

    alongside this __init__.py file. Due to lack of rpath support, Windows
    cannot find shared libraries installed within wheels. To circumvent this,
    we pre-load ``lib_sf_error_state.dll`` when on Windows.
    The logic for this function was borrowed from the function ``make_init``
    in `scipy/tools/openblas_support.py`:
    https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/bb92c8014e21052e7dde67a76b28214dd1dcb94a/tools/openblas_support.py#L239-L274
    """  # noqa: E501
    if os.name == "nt":
        try:
            from ctypes import WinDLL
            basedir = os.path.dirname(__file__)
        except:  # noqa: E722
            pass
        else:
            dll_path = os.path.join(basedir, "libsf_error_state.dll")
            if os.path.exists(dll_path):
                WinDLL(dll_path)

_load_libsf_error_state()
```

One week in, all CI jobs were passing and the [PR](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20321) creating
`libsf_error_state` was merged. We did it! We fixed the bug we'd introduced in `special.errstate` with months to go
before the next SciPy release—or so we thought.

### Breaking SciPy for MSVC builds

> On May 30th, SciPy maintainer and Conda-Forge core member Axel Obermeir (h-vetinari) posted a comment on his open PR,

Reviewer: I'd not use Axel's name but only his GitHub handle, since he doesn't add his name on purpose to his GitHub profile.

[scipy-feedstock/gh-277](https://github.com/conda-forge/scipy-feedstock/pull/277). The first release candidate for
SciPy 1.14.0 had just come out, he was starting the process to add version 1.14.0 to Conda-Forge, and noticed that
Windows builds for SciPy 1.14.0 were failing with the following error:

```
lld-link: error: undefined symbol: scipy_sf_error_get_action
```

How could this be? SciPy's own CI jobs were passing on Windows, but here, symbols from `lib_sf_error_state` were clearly
not being found. The thing is, at that point in time there was still a key gap in SciPy's CI coverage. Although there
were Windows builds in CI, they all used the MinGW compiler toolchain [], with no jobs using MSVC (Microsoft Visual C++)

> []. We had run into another platform specific difference.

Reviewer: more empty brackets

Fortunately, Axel knew what the problem was. On Linux, Mac OS (and Windows while using MinGW), symbols from shared

> libraries are exported by default, but with MSVC they must be explicitly exported from shared libraries and explicitly

Reviewer: I'd say "MSVC and Clang-cl" here, and only Clang-cl further down, since SciPy doesn't actually work with MSVC. We use Clang-cl on conda-forge.

Author: Ah, right. The MSVC CI job just builds it, and I remember that I could get SciPy to build with MSVC locally (if disabling Pythran), but it would fail at runtime due to an issue with Blas.

imported into consumers by annotating source code with special compiler directives: `__declspec(dllexport)` for exports

> and and `__declspec(dllimport)` for imports.

Reviewer: typo: "and and"

He had a recipe ready to use: defining and using macros which conditionally compiled to the right thing depending on their context.

```C++
// SCIPY_DLL
// inspired by https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/20240116.2/absl/base/config.h#L736-L753
//
// When building sf_error_state as a DLL, this macro expands to `__declspec(dllexport)`
// so we can annotate symbols appropriately as being exported. When used in
// headers consuming a DLL, this macro expands to `__declspec(dllimport)` so
// that consumers know the symbol is defined inside the DLL. In all other cases,
// the macro expands to nothing.
// Note: SCIPY_DLL_{EX,IM}PORTS are set in scipy/special/meson.build
#if defined(SCIPY_DLL_EXPORTS)
    #define SCIPY_DLL __declspec(dllexport)
#elif defined(SCIPY_DLL_IMPORTS)
    #define SCIPY_DLL __declspec(dllimport)
#else
    #define SCIPY_DLL
#endif
```

As soon as I had a chance, I fired up a Windows VM again and put together [a PR](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20937)

> implementing Axel's solution. After a couple misteps, MSVC builds were working again. There would be no need to push

Reviewer: typo: "misteps" -> "of missteps"

back the release date. A couple weeks later, fellow Quansight Labs member and LFortran/LPython core developer Gagandeep

> Singh (czgdp1807) submitted [a PR](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/20985) to add an MSVC CI job, plugging the gap in

Reviewer: github handle for Gagan?

applications. In October 2023, a Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP) was accepted to make the GIL optional. This proposal,
[PEP 703](https://peps.python.org/pep-0703/), is well worth reading for its in-depth summary of the surrounding
issues. CPython 3.13 launched with an optional
[free-threaded mode](https://docs.python.org/3.13/whatsnew/3.13.html#free-threaded-cpython)
which supports running with the GIL disabled. Free-threading in Python offers great promise, but to take advantage of
it, extensions need to be rewritten with thread safety in mind.

`libsf_error_state` is obviously not thread safe. There is a global array carrying the current state of special
function error handling policies with nothing to stop competing threads from trying to access the same memory
location. Simultaneous modifications could even leave an entry in some corrupt and indeterminate state. This situation
is known as a data race and leads to undefined behavior in C and C++ []. Weird things can happen when there is a data race.

The latest tale in the saga of `libsf_error_state` is [a PR](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/21956) from Edgar

> Margffoy (andfoy)—a member of Quansight Labs' free-threaded Python team—to ensure thread safety by declaring the array

Reviewer: github handle? and spaces around the dashes

Author: I've seen inconsistent recommendations for spaces around em-dashes, e.g. https://writing.stackexchange.com/questions/8555/em-dash-space-or-no-space-between-words. Grepping for "—" among the labs blog posts, I found a pretty equal distribution of spaces vs no spaces. If you like spaces better, I'll do that.

`sf_error_actions` thread local. This eliminates the data-race by making it so each thread gets its own separate copy of
the array. Edgar and the others on the free-threaded Python team have been doing great work improving support for
free-threaded Python across the ecosystem for much of this past year.

In a curious reversal, it is now (the `win32` flavor of) MinGW that is causing trouble due to lack of proper threading

> support [].

Reviewer: empty brackets. I think the sentence should be continued with something like "since MinGW does not support thread local variables".

Author: I was basing it on this from Edgar

*It seems that using std::mutex also causes the same MinGW threading issues to surface.*

and part of your reply

* MinGW-w64 comes in two build flavors: posix and win32. The posix builds have threading support, the win32 ones don't*

It seemed like something deeper might be going on, since even the mutex isn't working. I don't really understand the underlying issue though.

Reviewer: I don't think there's a need to explain in detail, just the basic reason (MinGW doesn't have support).

## Reflections

Now that the dust has mostly settled, it's valuable to look back and try to judge whether we made the right choice. Over
the entire timeframe, the primary goal for Irwin and I was always to make as much of SciPy special available on GPUs as
possible—with secondary goals of simplifying SciPy special's build process and improving the scalar kernel codebase. The

> story of `libsf_error_state` is that of a side quest—a story of needing to fix something we broke in pursuit of bigger

Reviewer: spaces around brackets here

things—and the challenges we faced and brought to others because we underestimated the difficulty of our chosen
solution. Having a single array for managing shared state between the extension modules appeals to a desire to have a

> single source of truth [], but looking back, it would have taken much less time to have each extension module carry its

Reviewer: empty brackets

turns out that `_ufuncs_cxx` has its own copy of `sf_error_actions` and it is updated in synchrony when setting the
error state from Python.

From [github.com/scipy/.../\_ufuncs_extra_code.pxi](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/b98e79e4b326bf3beb4d861a744101ee7f438471/scipy/special/_ufuncs_extra_code.pxi#L158-L162):

```python
    for error, action in kwargs.items():
        action = _sf_error_action_map[action]
        code = _sf_error_code_map[error]
        _set_action(code, action)
        scipy.special._ufuncs_cxx._set_action(code, action)
```

I also found [an October 2016 comment on GitHub](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/6722#issuecomment-256539142) from
currently inactive SciPy maintainer Josh Wilson (person142), the original author of SciPy special's error handling
features, which shows he was already aware of the problem we ended up facing. He was trying to make special function
error handling work correctly in
[`scipy.special.cython_special`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/special.cython_special.html), a module for
calling scalar versions of special function from Cython. To quote:

> "To make the necessary modifications to cython_special error handling we need to instead share a single global variable

Reviewer: typeset `cython_special` as code here?

> between the two extension modules. On gcc we could do this with -rpath, but coming up with a portable solution seems

Reviewer: GCC in capitals and `-rpath` as code?

calling scalar versions of special function from Cython. To quote:

"To make the necessary modifications to cython_special error handling we need to instead share a single global variable
between the two extension modules. On gcc we could do this with -rpath, but coming up with a portable solution seems
messy. Is there a nice way out of this?"

A _nice_ way? Perhaps not. He wisely chose instead to disable error handling in `cython_special` entirely. But maybe now
that we at least have _a_ portable way to share global state between extension modules, this is worth revisiting.

Before we finish, one more gem: in [another GitHub comment from
2016](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/6681#issuecomment-254192679), currently inactive SciPy BDFL Pauli Virtanen
([@pv](https://github.com/pv)) suggested to "make `sf_error` error handling thread-local (which probably should be done
in any case)". Over eight years later this is finally happening. I should probably go back and read old comment threads
more often.

### Funding acknowledgements

This work was supported by the 2020 NASA ROSES grant, _Reinforcing the Foundations of Scientific Python_.

---

> [^1]: The first regular shared library, not including Python extension modules.

Reviewer 2: Also not including the vendored libraries? i.e. Everything in `scipy.libs`, `libscipy_openblas-*.so`, `libgfortran-*.so`.

Side note: I kinda expected that `libsf_error_state.so` would also be in `scipy.libs`.

In  [2]: special.seterr(loss="warn")
```

then somewhere down in the stack, the following call will occur to update the error state.

```c
scipy_sf_error_set_action(SF_ERROR_LOSS, SF_ERROR_WARN)
```

If `special.gamma` is evaluated at an array containing a negative integer, then when the scalar kernel is called on the
offending entry, it will signal `SF_ERROR_SINGULAR` and `sf_error_actions` will be consulted to figure out what action
to take.

## The many battles to actually ship it

The shared library `libsf_error_state`'s contents are fairly simple, but how does one actually ship a shared library
within a Python package like SciPy? When we started out, we weren't even aware of any Python packages that contain an
internal shared library. The process for creating and using shared libraries depends on the operating system and
compiler toolchain. SciPy supports a wide range of platforms in aim of its goal to democratize access to scientific
computing tools and the greatest challenge turned out to be getting things to work on each of them. Several times, just
as we thought everything was finally working, another quirk would pop up that needed to be addressed.

> ### Path troubles

Reviewer: Found one more checking off the checkboxes in the PR description: from here on the headings switch from `##` to `###` - probably not intentional?

using the `"python dev.py build"` workflow and he was using an editable install: `"pip install -e . --no-build-isolation"`.
For the editable install, SciPy is installed directly in its own project folder, and the shared library and the relevant
extension modules were all being installed next to each other in `~/scipy/scipy/special`. For the `dev.py` workflow,
SciPy is installed elsewhere. Since I didn't specify where to install the shared library, it got put in the wrong
place. I fixed things by directly configuring the `install_dir` in Meson like this:

```
sf_error_state_lib = shared_library('sf_error_state', # Name of the library
  # Implementation files contained it.
  ['sf_error_state.c'],
  # Additional places the preprocessor can look for header files
  include_directories: ['../_lib', '../_build_utils/src'],
  install: true
  # Tell meson where to install the shared library
  install_dir: py3.get_install_dir() / 'scipy/special',
)
```

Even after this, I was still seeing the same error. I asked Ralf about it, and found what happens is that `pip`
goes through [meson-python](https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson-python) while `dev.py` uses Meson directly.

> `meson-python` takes care to set the [`RPATH`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rpath) for each extension module.

Author: Thank you!

documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/building/index.html#building-from-source-for-scipy-development), I was
using the `"python dev.py build"` workflow and he was using an editable install: `"pip install -e . --no-build-isolation"`.
For the editable install, SciPy is installed directly in its own project folder, and the shared library and the relevant
extension modules were all being installed next to each other in `~/scipy/scipy/special`. For the `dev.py` workflow,
SciPy is installed elsewhere. Since I didn't specify where to install the shared library, it got put in the wrong
place. I fixed things by directly configuring the `install_dir` in Meson like this:

```python
sf_error_state_lib = shared_library('sf_error_state', # Name of the library
  # Implementation files contained it.
  ['sf_error_state.c'],
  # Additional places the preprocessor can look for header files
  include_directories: ['../_lib', '../_build_utils/src'],
  install: true
  # Tell meson where to install the shared library
  install_dir: py3.get_install_dir() / 'scipy/special',
)
```

Even after this, I was still seeing the same error. I asked Ralf about it, and found what happens is that `pip`

> goes through [meson-python](https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson-python) and its editable install support uses

Author: ```suggestion
goes through [meson-python](https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson-python) and `pip`'s editable install support uses
```

The sentence is ambiguous by structure, and although I think context makes it clear that it's `pip` that has editable install support, not all readers might be aware of this. My preference is to be explicit to avoid the cognitive overhead of resolving the ambiguity.

extension modules straight from the build directory, while `dev.py` uses Meson directly and does an actual install

> step with `meson install`. For the editable install, two things can make the shared library loading work:

Author: ```suggestion
step with `meson install`. For the editable install, two things allow loading the shared library to work with the above Meson config:
```

Just trying to rewrite in my own voice.

(1) Meson adds the build directory to the [`RPATH`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rpath) of each extension module in

> order to enable usage without an install step (and strips it again during the `meson install` step), and (2) when

Author: ```suggestion
order to enable usage without an install step but strips it again during the `meson install` step used in the `dev.py` build, and (2) when
```

again, just trying to maintain my own style, where I try to be explicit about things to make them clear more quickly to less familiar readers.

the `install_dir` for a shared library is outside of the Python package's tree under `site-packages`,
`meson-python` takes care of rewriting the install dir automatically to be within `site-packages` and it rewrites

> the RPATHs to match. The `dev.py` method avoids both of these fixes, and the `RPATH` that tells the dynamic linker
> where to look for shared libraries ends up being wrong as a result.

Author: ```suggestion
the RPATHs to match. The `dev.py` method doesn't include either of these fixes, and as a result, the `RPATH` that tells the dynamic linker where to look for shared libraries ends up being wrong.
```

It's fine as is, but just trying to match my own style for how I would write this.
